Add Athena engine 3 blog post (#362)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2022-12-01-athena.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Trino delivers for Amazon Athena"
author: Manfred Moser, Martin Traverso
image: /assets/trino-light.png
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

> It is time to reach out to another large group of Trino users. The release of

Reviewer: I feel like this intro paragraph needs a slightly better hook or a little more excitement.

Author: I hope the new update is better

the new engine version for [Amazon Athena](https://aws.amazon.com/athena)
upgrades Athena to a recent version of Trino from a rather old version. This
update brings a ton of improvements from the Trino project to the users of the
popular cloud-based query service.

<!--more-->

## Shared history

> Amazon Athena and Trino share a long history. From the beginning of Athena the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Amazon Athena and Trino share a long history. From the beginning of Athena, the
```

query engine under the hood was Trino, then still called Presto. Athena created
a low-maintenance, powerful access mode to your data in S3 and beyond. It

> combined the performance and features of Trino, with the convenience of a cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
combined the performance and features of Trino with the convenience of a cloud
```

> service, and therefore enabled new users and use cases. You could take advantage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
service, which enabled new users and use cases. You could take advantage
```

> of Trino, without needing a team of experts to deploy and operate a Trino

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of Trino without needing a team of experts to deploy and operate a Trino
```

cluster for your organization. In fact, we wrote about this in the first edition
of **Trino: The Definitive Guide**. There is also a section in the [new second

> edition]({% post_url 2022-10-03-the-definitive-guide-2 %}), that you can get for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
edition]({% post_url 2022-10-03-the-definitive-guide-2 %}) that you can get for
```

[free from Starburst](https://www.starburst.io/info/oreilly-trino-guide/).

## Time flies

> Since the initial release however, time has not stood still. In fact, the Trino

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But since the initial release of Athena, time has not stood still. In fact, the Trino
```
I know some people teach that we shouldn't use conjunctions at the start of a sentence, but it's a rule that's very ok to break to make things flow better, especially in something like a blog post (as opposed to a formal technical guide).

project has accelerated in [innovation, features, and releases tremendously]({%

> post_url 2022-08-04-decade-innovation %}). Amazon Athena users now get access to

Reviewer: I feel like it'd be good to emphasize / highlight that Trino has accelerated, but Athena has stayed on the same past version for consistency/stability... until now.

many of these great features. As [AWS mentions in the
announcement](https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2022/10/amazon-athena-announces-upgraded-query-engine/),
"over 50 new SQL functions, 30 new features, and more than 90 query performance
improvements" are now available due the upgrade to a new version of Trino. These
include [Row pattern recognition with MATCH_RECOGNIZE]({% post_url
2021-05-19-row_pattern_matching %}), [new window features]({% post_url
2021-03-10-introducing-new-window-features %}), support for ``UPDATE`` or
``TRUNCATE`` statements, and many others.

> Performance improvements in our core engine as well as all the Trino connectors,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Performance improvements in our core engine and all the Trino connectors
```

show up in every release note. The [improvements observed by the Athena team in
their
benchmarks](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/big-data/upgrade-to-athena-engine-version-3-to-increase-query-performance-and-access-more-analytics-features/)
show the resulting gains nicely. This is great evidence that our approach of

> constantly working on small improvements, wherever we find potential, works

Reviewer: ```suggestion
constantly working on small improvements wherever we find potential works
```

> well. This is necessary since we are already at a very high performance level,
> like an elite athlete, where every small improvement matters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
well. This approach is necessary since Trino is at a very high performance level,
and like an elite athlete, every small improvement matters.
```

> Importantly also note that these improvements are in the Trino version of the
> engine only, since the [Presto project does not include these features]({%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also important to note that these improvements are only in the Trino version
of the engine, since the [Presto project does not include these features]({%
```

post_url 2022-08-02-leaving-facebook-meta-best-for-trino %}).

## Client tools and collaboration

Athena users also benefit from improvements for supporting client tools such as
Python clients, dbt, Metabase and others. Working with other communities is of
critical importance to the Trino project. The [innovations in our Iceberg

> connector]({{site.url}}/episodes/40.html), that are all now also available to
> Athena users, are a great example how we can lead the way together. Working with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connector]({{site.url}}/episodes/40.html) that are all now available to
Athena users are a great example how we can lead the way together. Working with
```

contributors from Amazon and other companies and projects has yielded some

> amazing improvements. In the [Trino summit and contributor
> congregation]({{site.url}}/episodes/42.html) we to reconnected in person and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
amazing improvements. At the [Trino summit and contributor
congregation]({{site.url}}/episodes/42.html), we reconnected in person and
```

Reviewer: Should it say connected or reconnected?

Author: reconnected .. since we had contact with most before..

established even closer collaboration.

## Looking forward

So, what is next for Trino and Athena users? First up, you should upgrade to the

> new Trino engine in Athena, and avoid the legacy Presto engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new Trino engine in Athena and avoid the legacy Presto engine.
```
This feels a little strongly-worded. I know we aren't fans of Presto, but there might be a more delicate way to put this while maintaining the same meaning.

Author: Nah ... lets call it out as it is ;-)

Reviewer: We do still need to remove the comma here.

> Second, check out some of the great presentation from [Trino Summit 2022]({%

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, check out some of the great presentations from [Trino Summit 2022]({%
```

post_url 2022-11-21-trino-summit-2022-recap %}) and [hear about some of our
impressions]({{site.url}}/episodes/42.html).

And last but not least, stay tuned for more goodness. Trino already shipped

> further releases, that included support for `MERGE`, table functions, and more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
further releases which included support for `MERGE`, table functions, and more
```

Author: I have been told by a few editors in the past to avoid "which" ..

performance improvements. The Athena team is working hard on updating Trino for
your benefit regularly.

Celebrating our [first decade of the Trino project this last summer]({% post_url
2022-09-12-tenth-birthday-celebration-recap %}) has shown a great trajectory for

> the project and the community. Looks like the next decade is going to be even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the project and the community, and it looks like the next decade is going to be even
```

better!

> Sending a warm welcome to the Trino community to the Amazon Athena team and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sending a warm welcome from the Trino community to the Amazon Athena team and
```

"over 50 new SQL functions, 30 new features, and more than 90 query performance
improvements" are now available due the upgrade to a new version of Trino. These
include [Row pattern recognition with MATCH_RECOGNIZE]({% post_url
2021-05-19-row_pattern_matching %}), [new window features]({% post_url
2021-03-10-introducing-new-window-features %}), support for ``UPDATE`` or
``TRUNCATE`` statements, and many others.

Performance improvements in our core engine and all the Trino connectors show up
in every release note. The [improvements observed by the Athena team in their
benchmarks](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/big-data/upgrade-to-athena-engine-version-3-to-increase-query-performance-and-access-more-analytics-features/)
show the resulting gains nicely. This is great evidence that our approach of
constantly working on small improvements wherever we find potential works well.
This approach is necessary since Trino is already at a very high performance
level, and like an elite athlete, where every small improvement matters.

It is also important to note that these improvements are only in the  Trino
version of the engine, since the [Presto project does not include these

> features]({% post_url 2022-08-02-leaving-facebook-meta-best-for-trino %}).

Reviewer 2: 🔥 🔥 🔥
